---
layout: assignment
unit: archival-digital-turn
lang: en
title: "Muybridge's legacy: searching on the web"
cover:
tags:
  - media history
  - web research
  - search engines
order: 2
requirements: Fast WIFI connection, access to Ranke.2, computer or laptop, application on laptop or computer to view video,
learning outcomes:
  - Understand the dynamics of search engines

---
Finding content about Muybridge on the web is partly determined by what is indexed by search engines. Which search engine you are used to rely on depends largely on how you have learned to use the web. This assignment is meant to give you an idea of the possible diversity and ranking of search results. You are going to compare results of a search for Muybridge in two search engines: Google and Yahoo

First get some insights about how search engines work:
-  Watch this lecture by Eli Pariser on the Filter Bubble: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Dua_UvR5mtI
-  Watch this explanation about how search engines work by google specialist Matt Cutts: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BNHR6IQJGZs
<!-- more -->

<!-- briefing-student -->

### 2a. Google compared to Yahoo
<!-- section-contents -->

- Open two windows on your screen, one with Google and one with Yahoo and conduct a search on Eadward Muybridge in both
- List the  first 10 results using the table in the template
- How would you characterize the various organisations/institutions that have published information about EM online?
- What is their interest? Use the key words that are indicated in your template.
- Do they have original material of Muybridge in their premises, or analogue or digital copies?

<!-- section -->
### 2b. Change your settings
<!-- section-contents -->

- What you can find on the web is also determined by the settings of your search engine. If you change them to another language you might get different results.
- Consult this instruction on how to change the settings of your search engine https://docs.google.com/document/d/1ViUm0C3Ov1w5ut1O7uY0FoOyaQxw82hvTfkfN3ZfqeA/edit 
- Try to set the engine to French, German, Italian or Spanish, conduct the same search
- Are there any search results that you would have missed by only searching in English?



<!-- briefing-teacher -->
## Briefing lecturer


#### Reading/viewing  suggestions
