---
layout: assignment
unit: transformation
lang: en
title: "‘Transforming’ your Appearance Online"  
cover:
tags:
  -  narcissism
  -  snapchat
  -  Viola-Jones algorithm
learning outcomes:
-  Learn how digital technology and social media enhance the potential for self-fashioning and experimenting with changing one’s appearance as well as how innovations in digital technology generate apps that can be used for entertainment. 
order: 4
---
As shown in the [‘Transformation’ clip](https://ranke2.uni.lu/u/transformation/#c-clip.en), medical technologies enable us to change our appearance. This can vary from the reconstruction of limbs, to transgender individuals undergoing sex reassignment surgery, to injecting botox under our skin to make ourselves look younger. However, there is also a link between physical transformation and digital technology in the sense that social media offer the possibility to expose an ‘idealised’ version of one’s self, as well as having fun with friends by using face-morphing apps. In this assignment, the argument is put forward that digital technology enhances the tendency to be dissatisfied with real life and create alternative worlds. As such, you are invited to reflect on this position and your own use of social media.
<!-- more -->

<!-- briefing-student -->

### 4.a Transforming your appearance: narcissism | 45 min 
<!-- section-contents -->

Direct access to the life of celebrities who promote particular lifestyles enhances the tendency to be unsatisfied with one’s appearance or personality while digital technology facilitates the urge to ‘craft’ or ‘model’ a different personality then the one that is determined by our genes. In this assignment, you are going to explore this phenomenon which is linked to one of Ovid’s poems about a man named Narcissus who fell in love with his own reflection.

- Watch [this 5-minute TED Ed lecture](https://youtu.be/arJLy3hX1E8) in the form of an animation by psychologist W. Keith Campbell about the myth of Narcissus and how this is linked to the psychological condition known as narcissistic personality disorder.
- Then, read this blog post [‘I’m in Love With Myself: The Age of Digital Narcissism’](https://www.marieclaire.com/culture/a16767138/social-media-narcissism/) published by journalist Chloe Metzger of the magazine Marie Claire that offers a personal reflection on the use of social media and the impact it can have on one’s self perception.

While Campbell explains narcissism as a personality feature that is inherited or more likely to occur due to a particular upbringing, Metzger stresses the impact of social pressure in the formation of narcissism. Reflecting on the two videos, answer the following questions:

- Contrary to the popular belief that generations that grew up with social media are more ‘narcissistic’, the [research that Metzger cites](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29065280) shows a decrease in narcissism among the American student population. How does she explain this contradiction? 
- What is the argument that Campbell makes for dismissing the term ‘narcissism’ for the intensive use of social media?
- What is the argument that psychiatrist Erin Vogel makes for labelling social media as potentially addictive?
- What is the position of psychiatrist Elias Aboujaoude about social media? Does he promote stopping its use?

In a review by William Saletan in the New York Times, two books are discussed that are relevant to our topic: Dr. Elias Aboujaoude’s book Virtually You and Jane McGonigal’s Reality is Broken (both published in 2011). You can find the review about ⅓ down the [page from the online course “Internet and Society,”](https://medium.com/@bhsecinternet/thursday-october-8-class-5-16646a58f4de) offered by the online magazine Medium, Aboujaoude’s view on the impact of the internet on people’s mental health is juxtaposed with the positive view of game developer Jane McGonigal and compared to the worldview of two famous philosophers: Hobbes (Aboujaoude) vs. Rousseau (McGonigal). Keeping in mind the book review, respond to the following questions (max. 75 words per question):

- Whose side is Saletan on? What is his main argument? 
- Why does he compare the two authors to the political philosophers Thomas Hobbes and Jean-Jacques Rousseau? 
- What is your own stance on this? Have you known periods in which engaging with the internet influenced your life in a disproportionate way?

<!-- section -->  

### 4.b  Transformation can be fun! | 15 min
<!-- section-contents -->

While there are certainly negative aspects of social media that should be kept in mind, transforming our appearance with the help of apps can also be used simply for enjoyment. We can make fun of ourselves, our friends, or celebrities by adding features to our face or by distorting or morphing them. Let’s explore the inner workings and background behind some well-known and commonly-used digital transformation technologies. 

- First, take a look at [this clip](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LN-5fJS_SBs) in which five face changing apps are demonstrated.
- What’s the difference in the way the presenter uses the term 'narcissism’ (0:06-0:11) compared to how it’s used in Keith Campbell’s TED video and the Chloe Metzger’s blog post in Assignment 4a?

- Next, watch [this clip](https://youtu.be/Pc2aJxnmzh0) from Vox that explains the technique behind one of the world’s most well-known apps, Snapchat, and answer the following questions:
- What is the Viola-Jones algorithm?
- What is the business model of Snapchat? How can they earn back the $150 million they paid to buy Ukraine company Looksery and their technology? 
- Have you ever used one of the five apps mentioned? What is your personal experience with them? 

<!-- section -->  

<!-- briefing-teacher -->
## Briefing lecturer
